PLANNER-2649 DRL to CS migration guide (#499)
kiegroup/optaplanner-website: optaplanner-website-root/content/learn/drl-to-constraint-streams-migration.adoc

> # Migrating OptaPlanner score DRL to Constraint Streams

Reviewer: Please use asciidoc style section headings (= instead of #), not markdown

Reviewer: - Use active tense: migrating -> migrate

> :jbake-description: Migrate deprecated Score DRL to Constraint Streams

Reviewer: If they google search for "scoreDRL to constraint streams", this will be the paragraph under the link to convince them to click on it.

Soft suggestion: Let's make it it a bit more convincing:

```suggestion
:jbake-description: Upgrade your OptaPlanner scoreDRL constraints to the faster constraint streams constraints today.
```

:toc:

> Ever since its introduction back in 2020,
> the https://www.optaplanner.org/docs/optaplanner/latest/constraint-streams/constraint-streams.html[Constraint Streams framework] ("CS") has seen great adoption and has been used to implement any problem you can think of.

Reviewer: - 
- It's not a framework: framework -> API
- active tense => how about we reword the "ever since"
```suggestion
For a couple of years now, the https://www.optaplanner.org/docs/optaplanner/latest/constraint-streams/constraint-streams.html[Constraint Streams API] ("CS") is fully featured and widely adopted.
It can handle any use case written in scoreDRL. It's also faster and https://www.optaplanner.org/blog/2020/04/07/ConstraintStreams.html[easier to use].
```

> Due to this success, we have finally decided to deprecate its predecessor, the score DRL framework.

Reviewer: - No "we" in professional documentation (doc writer guidelines) => active tense

```suggestion
Therefore, the scoreDRL API is now deprecated.
```

## What does deprecating score DRL mean?

Users of OptaPlanner 8 can continue using score DRL without any concern as we will continue maintaining score DRL support for the lifetime of OptaPlanner 8.

> However, OptaPlanner 9 will completely remove all support for score DRL.

Reviewer: (hard) Mentioning OptaPlanner 9 is dangerous. It gives the perception as we're going to do that soon (which is not true) and creates uncertainty and doubt. I would simply remove this line.

Users of score DRL are therefore encouraged to start planning their migration from score DRL to some other scoring mechanism, preferrably CS.

> This document intends to make such migration as easy as possible, showing real-world examples of rules and constraints found in https://www.optaplanner.org/docs/optaplanner/latest/use-cases-and-examples/examples-overview/examples-overview.html[OptaPlanner Examples].

Reviewer: Active tense, concise. (writing != talking)
```suggestion
This document makes such migration as easy as possible, showing real-world examples of constraints found in https://www.optaplanner.org/docs/optaplanner/latest/use-cases-and-examples/examples-overview/examples-overview.html[OptaPlanner Examples].
```

## Benefits of Constraint Streams

CS is a modern full-featured API for writing OptaPlanner constraints, offering several benefits over score DRL:

* Developers do not need to learn any new language, CS is plain Java.
* Full IDE support incl. syntax highlighting and refactoring.
* Comprehensive support for unit testing.

> * In certain use cases, CS performs considerably faster than score DRL.

Reviewer: This give the perception that it's mostly not faster. But it is, so:
```suggestion
* In most use cases, CS performs considerably faster than score DRL.
```

## Migrating to Constraint Streams, step by step

CS and DRL are very similar in their approach and in fact both use Drools to execute the constraint logic.
Because of this, migrating many parts of score DRL to CS is straight-forward, even mechanical.

> However, this guide will not help you if your score DRL uses the following constructs, as there is no direct mapping between DRL and CS in that case:

Reviewer: active tense
```suggestion
However, this guide does not help you if your score DRL uses the following constructs, as there is no direct mapping between DRL and CS in that case:
```

I would write this less defensively, more friendly/positive. Something like:

```suggestion
There are a few constructs that are hard to migrate easily and depend on a case by case basis. These are not covered in this guide:
```

* DRL's `insertLogical()` allows information to be transferred between rules.
This is not possible in CS, where each constraint is isolated and stands on its own.
* DRL's `eval()` allows for arbitrary Java code execution anywhere on the left-hand side of a rule.

> This is not possible in CS.

Reviewer: eval() is just filter().
Even nested in an accumulate, it works as a filter() before the groupBy()

I wouldn't add this here and do a section on it.

> * DRL's right-hand side allows for arbitrary Java code execution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* DRL's right-hand side allows for arbitrary Java code execution that goes far beyond calculating the match weight.
```

> This is not possible in CS, where each constraint can only result in either a score reward or a penalty.

Reviewer: Let's make it clear that this is a bad idea to do:
```suggestion
This anti-pattern is not possible in CS, where each constraint can only result in either a score reward or a penalty.
```

> * Using more than 3 joins in a single rule, which is very unlikely.

Reviewer: This would be a red flag to me to switch to CS, ever.

But in reality, we do support 4+ joins, through map() etc. Make sure to mention that.
Or even better, create a note on how to deal with 4 joins mentioning to use a map(), even if there is no code snippet to show it. It would be better than this.

If you are using any of these constructs, we recommend that you first refactor them out of your DRL and then check back with this migration guide.

> ### The basics

Reviewer: Here's where the actual work begins. Let's make that clear. Everything before this is introduction/motivation. This is step 1.
Can we make the top level steps 1 level down ("==") instead of 2 levels down ("===") ?

How about: "The basics" => "Create and configure a ConstraintProvider class"

In score DRL, all your constraints are typically written in a single text file like so:

[source, drl]
----
package org.optaplanner.examples.vehiclerouting.optional.score;
    dialect "java"

import ...;

global HardSoftLongScoreHolder scoreHolder;

rule "vehicleCapacity"
    when
        ...
    then
        ...
end

...
----

In this file, each rule represents 1 or more constraints.
In CS, the DRL file is replaced by a standard Java source code:

[source, java]
----
package org.optaplanner.examples.vehiclerouting.score;

import ...;

public class VehicleRoutingConstraintProvider implements ConstraintProvider {

    @Override
    public Constraint[] defineConstraints(ConstraintFactory factory) {
        return new Constraint[] {
                vehicleCapacity(factory),
                ...
        };
    }

    protected Constraint vehicleCapacity(ConstraintFactory factory) {
        ...
    }

    ...
}

----

The method `defineConstraints(...)`,  a single method on the `ConstraintProvider`, lists all your constraints.
Each constraint is then typically represented by a method.

#### Solver configuration

> Users of Quarkus most likely do not need to worry about solver configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Users of Quarkus and Spring most likely do not need to worry about solver configuration.
```

Reviewer: most likely -> don't

> Removing score DRL and introducing a `ConstraintProvider` implementation ought to be enough.

Reviewer: - Writing guidelines: do not use "maybe", "ought to be", "probably", etc.
- active tense: removing -> rmove
```suggestion
Just remove the score DRL and create a `ConstraintProvider` implementation.
```

[source, java]
----
Constraint distanceToPreviousStandstill(ConstraintFactory factory) {
    return factory.forEach(Customer.class)
        .penalizeLong("distanceToPreviousStandstill",
            HardSoftLongScore.ONE_SOFT,
            customer -> customer.getDistanceFromPreviousStandstill());
}
----

Note that:

* `forEach(Customer.class)` serves the same purpose as `Customer(...)` in DRL.
* There is no need to check if planning variable is initialized (`previousStandstill != null`), as `forEach(...)` does it automatically.
If this behavior is not what you want, use `forEachIncludingNullVars(...)` instead.
* Right-hand side of the rule (the part after `then`) is replaced by a call to `penalizeLong(...)`.
The size of the penalty is now determined by constraint weight (`HardSoftLongScore.ONE_SOFT`)
and match weight (the call to a getter on `Customer`).

#### Applying rewards instead of penalties

In the example above, score DRL applies a penalty by adding a negative constraint match like so:

`scoreHolder.addSoftConstraintMatch(kcontext, - $distanceFromPreviousStandstill)`.

> CS makes this more explicit by using a keyword `reward` instead of `penalize`, while keeping the match weight positive:

Reviewer: Bug?

```suggestion
CS makes this more explicit by using a keyword `penalize` instead of `add...`, while keeping the match weight positive:
```

> `rewardLong(..., ..., customer -> customer.getDistanceFromPreviousStandstill())`.

Reviewer: bug?
```suggestion
`penalizeLong(..., ..., customer -> customer.getDistanceFromPreviousStandstill())`.
```

> #### Applying different penalty types

Reviewer: Before this part, discuss that impact = constraint weight multiplied by match weight.
discuss that the constraint weight determines both the constraint level and a base weight, equal for all matches of this constraint, but that a match weigh is match specific.

    return factory.forEachUniquePair(Queen.class,
            equal(Queen::getRowIndex))
        .penalize("Horizontal conflict", SimpleScore.ONE);
}
----

Using `forEachUniquePair(Queen.class)`, the `greaterThan(...)` joiner is inserted automatically and we only need to match the row indexes.

For more information, see https://www.optaplanner.org/docs/optaplanner/latest/constraint-streams/constraint-streams.html#constraintStreamsJoin[joining] in OptaPlanner documentation.

#### Applying filters while joining

In certain cases, you may need to apply a filter while joining, such as in the case of the Conference Scheduling example:

[source, drl]
----
rule "Talk prerequisite talks"
    when
        $talk1 : Talk(timeslot != null)
        $talk2 : Talk(timeslot != null,
                !getTimeslot().startsAfter($talk1.getTimeslot()),
                getPrerequisiteTalkSet().contains($talk1))
    then
        scoreHolder.penalize(kcontext,
                $talk1.getDurationInMinutes() + $talk2.getDurationInMinutes());
end
----

Note that the second `Talk` is only selected if its `prerequisiteTalkSet` contains the first `Talk`.

> Since there is no CS joiner for this specific operation, we need to use a generic filtering joiner like so:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since there is no CS joiner for this specific operation yet, we need to use a generic filtering joiner like so:
```

[source, java]
----
Constraint talkPrerequisiteTalks(ConstraintFactory factory) {
    return factory.forEach(Talk.class)
        .join(Talk.class,
            Joiners.greaterThan(
                    talk1 -> talk1.getTimeslot().getEndDateTime(),
                    talk2 -> talk2.getTimeslot().getStartDateTime()),
            Joiners.filtering((talk1, talk2) -> talk2.getPrerequisiteTalkSet().contains(talk1)))
        .penalizeConfigurable(TALK_PREREQUISITE_TALKS, Talk::combinedDurationInMinutes);
    }
----

### Migrating `exists` and `not`

DRL's `exists` can be converted to CS much like the join above.
Consider this rule from the Cloud Balancing example:

[source, drl]
----
rule "computerCost"
    when
        $computer : CloudComputer($cost : cost)
        exists CloudProcess(computer == $computer)
    then
        scoreHolder.addSoftConstraintMatch(kcontext, - $cost);
end
----

> Here, we only penalize a computer if there exists a process that runs on that particular computer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here, only penalize a computer if a process exists that runs on that particular computer.
```
